---
layout: post
title: "cool n770 hack"
---
"cool n770 hack"
===
If you are a nokia tablet user like me (n770/n800/n810), you must have wished for this feature I am going to describe.  
  
When I am browsing the net on my desktop I come across a webpage that I would like to open on my n770 right away - mostly it's some maemo package that I would like to download and install. The problem is rewriting the cryptic URLs in n770's address bar is time-consuming and error-prone. Going to the same URL through google search takes couple of page loads, which takes sizeable time.  
  
One way to ease this process is to use some clipboard sharing software (synergy, vnc viewer), I am not sure if that works, but I bet someone has tried it. Besides, it will be too heavy as compared to the following method I suggest here.  
  
If you have [ssh enabled][0] on your tablet then you can run this simple script on your desktop and command the tablet to open any URL in its browser.  
  
It is only this single command:  
  
ssh root@<ip of tablet\> "dbus-send --system --type=method\_call --dest=\\"com.nokia.osso\_browser\\" --print-reply /com/nokia/osso\_browser/request com.nokia.osso\_browser.load\_url string:\\"$1\\""  
  
  
Save this in a script nokia-browser.sh and the next time you want to open a URL, just execute:  
  
nokia-browser.sh <URL\>  
  
You will be prompted for password (unless you have setup the keys)  
  
Check your tablet, it must be loading the URL by now. If a browser is not already open it will be opened automatically because by d-bus magic.  
  
I learnt about this command from this [mailing list post][1]. I am just trying to use it remotely.

[0]: http://maemo.org/community/wiki/InstallSsh
[1]: http://osdir.com/ml/handhelds.maemo.devel/2006-01/msg00107.html
