---
layout: post
title: "Trust in Company"
---

Trust in Company
---

As we use software products developed by big corporate entities, we always have a nagging fear of how they can screw us in the long run. If they are a free service provider like Google, Facebook; we worry how they could exploit the knowledge they have about our information and our habits. If we bought a software tool from a big company, say Adobe Photoshop Creative Cloud; we worry that if we stop paying the subscription we won't be access our data stored with the company OR if we still can access the data we won't be able to use it in any meaningful way because of proprietory file format.

These concerns are extremely important on the user's part. Largely because the big companies change over time. Because the people that run them change. Their shareholders change. Consequently their goals, principles and ethics are bound to change too. We can put a trust in an individual and the promises he/she makes. But giant corporations are driven by so many different individuals and don't necessarily have a strong leader at the helm, it's very difficult to trust our information with them.

A possible solution to this problem is **Open culture**. It involves opening up the source code under FOSS licenses, using royalty free open file formats, following standards so as to be compatible with the competing software products in order to protect user's freedom. Big corporations choose to adopt some of these practices (but almost never all of them) whenever it's not at odds with their business model. A total adoption of these practices can make it real hard to generate big revenue. Monetary profits are one of the important impulses in making superior products. Thus consideration for user's freedom comes at odds with making better products.

A company can however promise to not do certain evil things. Can be transparent about all of their workings. It can establish a trust and reputation among users so that they can entrust their work and information with them. However, as pointed out earlier, when the people running the companies change it's hard to develop a consistent ongoing trust. Taking their word that they won't abuse our data or lock us out so that we can't access our previous work, is absurd when they don't have a single individual who can be held accountable.

We need to develop a culture of small companies for this very reason. We have to encourage products from **Indie** developers. These small shops should focus on building superior products and make enough money that could make them millionaries, but not billionaires. Don't try to monopolize the market. If you can, open source the software. If you can't, set a financial target on the software product, after reaching it you can open its source under copyleft license. For example, after I make 10 million dollars from sales of this product I would release it under GPL. When you think about it, that's a very decent return on the amount of time and efforts you have invested in developing the product. This is how it should be. The software products do not require perpetual development. After one point it goes into maintenance mode, doesn't require as much effort. But software developers still keep charging same amount of money. Or worse, they will try to add features that don't belong to the product only to justify continued revenue. Instead it makes great sense to open source the product, that way you could even crowd source maintenance efforts. You can choose a copyleft license, which will prevent any competitors from making commercial gains without also sharing back their modifications to your source code.
